---
permalink: /
title: "Welcome! I study the growth and collapse of the Tibetan Plateau, focusing on processes ranging from oceanic subduction to continental collision."
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---
I am an associate professor of igneous petrology and geochemistry at the [School of Earth Sciences and Resources] (http://www.sesr.cugb.edu.cn/), [China University of Geosciences, Beijing] (http://www.cugb.edu.cn/). My research group integrates field geology with a variety of geochemical techniques to the petrogenesis (source, magma storage, evolution, and eruption) of igneous rocks on the Tibetan Plateau. Our goal is to deepen our understanding of how this vast and highest landmass on Earth was formed. Specifically, I focus on the interplay between lithospheric processes (from oceanic subduction to continental collision), magmatism, and surface responses. My research is primarily supported by funding from the National Science Foundation of China, the Ministry of Science and Technology of China, and my university. I have published over 20 peer-reviewed papers in leading Earth science journals such as Geology, GRL, JGR-SE, GCA, Tectonics, Journal of Petrology, American Mineralogist, GSA Bulletin, and G-cubed. (Some representative publications are listed below, and a complete list is available on my Google Scholar and ORCID profiles, linked on the left of this page.) Since 2024, I have served as an associate editor of GSA Bulletin. If you are interested in joining our group, please feel free to contact me.

Selective publications (* corresponding author):
1. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Huang, F., Liu, X. J., Li, M. J., Huang, Q. T., and Li, Z. L., 2024. Central Tibetan adakitic rocks archive the critical impact of water on the Nb/Ta variation in deep crustal melts. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta.
2. Li, M., Zeng, Y.C*., Tiepolo, M., Xu, J., Cannaò, E., Forni, F., and Huang, F., 2024. The capability of amphibole in tracing the physicochemical processes of magma mixing. Geophysical Research Letters, 51(14), e2024GL108906.
3. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Chen, J. L., Wang, B. D., Huang, F., and Yu, H. X., 2024. Paleocene oceanic-island basalt-type magmatism in the Lhasa Block attests to decoupled mantle-crust deformation during Indian-Asian collision. Geological Society of America Bulletin, 136(7-8), 3018-3026.
4. Li, M. J., Zeng, Y. C*., Tiepolo, M., Farina, F., Xu, J. F., Huang, F., et al. 2023. Grain-scale zircon Hf isotope heterogeneity inherited from sediment-metasomatized mantle: Geochemical and Nd-Hf-Pb-O isotopic constraints on Early Cretaceous intrusions in central Lhasa Terrane, Tibetan Plateau. American Mineralogist, 108(9), 1692-1707.
5. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Chen, J. L., Wang, B. D., and Huang, F., 2022. How and How Much Did Western Central Tibet Raise by India–Asia Collision?. Geophysical Research Letters, 49(20), e2022GL101206.
6. Zeng, Y., Ducea, M. N., Xu, J., Chen, J., and Dong, Y. H., 2021. Negligible surface uplift following foundering of thickened central Tibetan lower crust. Geology, 49(1), 45-50.
7. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Li, M. J., Chen, J. L., Wang, B. D., Huang, F., and Ren, S. H., 2021. Late Eocene two-pyroxene trachydacites from the southern Qiangtang Terrane, central Tibetan Plateau: High-temperature melting of overthickened and dehydrated lower crust. Journal of Petrology, 62(11), egab080.
8. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Chen, J. L., Wang, B. D., Huang, F., Xia, X. P., and Li, M. J., 2021. Early Cretaceous (∼ 138–134 Ma) Forearc Ophiolite and Tectonomagmatic Patterns in Central Tibet: Subduction Termination and Re‐initiation of Meso‐Tethys Ocean Caused by Collision of an Oceanic Plateau at the Continental Margin?. Tectonics, 40(3), e2020TC006423.
9. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Huang, F., Li, M. J., and Chen, Q., 2020. Generation of the 105–100 Ma Dagze volcanic rocks in the north Lhasa Terrane by lower crustal melting at different temperature and depth: Implications for tectonic transition. GSA Bulletin, 132(5-6), 1257-1272.
10. Zeng, Y. C., Xu, J. F., Ducea, M. N., Chen, J. L., Huang, F., and Zhang, L., 2019. Initial rifting of the Lhasa Terrane from Gondwana: Insights from the Permian (~262 Ma) amphibole‐rich lithospheric mantle‐derived Yawa basanitic intrusions in southern Tibet. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124(3), 2564-2581.
11. Zeng, Y. C., Chen, J. L., Xu, J. F., Wang, B. D., and Huang, F., 2016. Sediment melting during subduction initiation: Geochronological and geochemical evidence from the D arutso high‐M g andesites within ophiolite melange, central Tibet. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 17(12), 4859-4877.

